# EMNLP 2015 Tutorial -- Semantic Similarity Frontiers: From Concepts to Documents

## David Jurgens and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar

## Summary

Semantic similarity forms a central component in many NLP systems, from lexical
semantics, to part of speech tagging, to social media analysis. Recent years
have seen a renewed interest in developing new similarity techniques, buoyed in
part by work on embeddings and by SemEval tasks in Semantic Textual Similarity
and Cross-Level Semantic Similarity. The increased interest has led to hundreds
of techniques for measuring semantic similarity, which makes it difficult for
practitioners to identify which state-of-the-art techniques are applicable and
easily integrated into projects and for researchers to identify which aspects of
the problem require future research.

This tutorial synthesizes the current state of the art for measuring semantic
similarity for all types of conceptual or textual pairs and presents a broad
overview of current techniques, what resources they use, and the particular
inputs or domains to which the methods are most applicable. We survey methods
ranging from corpus-based approaches operating on massive or domains-specific
corpora to those leveraging structural information from expert-based or
collaboratively-constructed lexical resources. Furthermore, we review work on
multiple similarity tasks from sense-based comparisons to word, sentence, and
document-sized comparisons and highlight general-purpose methods capable of
comparing multiple types of inputs. Where possible, we also identify techniques
that have been demonstrated to successfully operate in multilingual or
cross-lingual settings.

Our tutorial provides a clear overview of currently-available tools and their
strengths for practitioners who need out of the box solutions and provides
researchers with an understanding of the limitations of current state of the art
and what open problems remain in the field. Given the breadth of available
approaches, participants will also receive a detailed bibliography of approaches
(including those not directly covered in the tutorial), annotated according to
the approaches abilities, and pointers to when open-source implementations of
the algorithms may be obtained.

## Bibliography

Along with the tutorial slides, we have provided an extended bibliography with
all the papers mentioned in the slides and many papers that we wished we had
time to discuss.  Our hope this that this bibliography serves as an living
document capturing much of the current work in the space and we welcome
contributions and suggestions for new works to add to it.  We especially welcome
git pull requests that directly update the .bib and .tex files, which we can use
to regenerate the .pdf
